# HDF5 sparse matrix

## Overview

A sparse matrix stored inside a group of a HDF5 file, corresponding to the [`hdf5_sparse_matrix`](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/BiocObjectSchemas/raw/master/raw/hdf5_sparse_matrix/v1.json) schema.
We use `~` below to denote properties of the schema.

The main HDF5 group containing the contents of the matrix is taken from `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.group`.
This group may have a `version` property containing a scalar `<major>.<minor>` version string.
If a version attibute is present on `group`, all version-related properties in the schema (e.g., `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.version`) will be ignored in the remainder of this document.

The expected contents of the main group depend on `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.format`.
This is currently limited to `"tenx_matrix"`.

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:**
the main group should contain a `format` string scalar attribute, equal to `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.format`.

## Formats

### `tenx_matrix`

This format is a compressed sparse column layout.

The main group should contain `data`, a 1-dimensional integer or floating-point dataset containing the values of the non-zero elements.
The exact type is determined from `~array.type` and should be integer, boolean or number:

- A number matrix should be represented by any integer or floating-point `data`.
  - **If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
    the HDF5 datatype should be a subset of a 64-bit float.
    See the [HDF5 policy draft (0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/0.1.0) for more details.
- An integer matrix should be represented by an integer `data`.
  - **If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
    the datatype should be a subset of a 32-bit signed integer.
- A boolean matrix can be represented by an integer `data`, where a value of 1 is truthy and a value of zero is falsey.
  - **If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
    the datatype should be a subset of a 32-bit signed integer.

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:**
the `data` dataset should contain a `type` string scalar attribute, equal to `~array.type`.

The main group should contain `indices`, a 1-dimensional integer dataset containing the 0-based row index for each non-zero element in `data`.
Indices for structural non-zero elements from the same column should form a contiguous block within `indices`, where all indices are unique and sorted in increasing order.

The main group should contain `indptr`, a 1-dimensional integer dataset of length equal to the number of columns plus 1.
This contains offsets to the start and end of each column in `indices`/`data`.
The first entry should be zero, the last entry should be equal to the length of `indices`/`data`, and all values should be sorted in increasing order.

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
the HDF5 datatype of `indices` and `indptr` should be a subset of a 64-bit unsigned integer.
Note that these two datasets do not need to have the same exact datatype.

The main group should also contain a `shape` dataset, a 1-dimensional integer dataset of length 2 storing the number of rows and columns.
This should be equal to `array.dimensions`.

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
the `shape` datatype should be a subset of a 64-bit signed integer when `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.format` is `"tenx_matrix"`.

## Missing values

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
the `data` dataset may have a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value to use as a missing value placeholder.
Any value equal to this placeholder should be treated as missing.
The HDF5 datatype of the attribute should be exactly equal to that of the dataset.
For number matrices, the scalar value may be NaN, in which case all NaNs in the dataset are treated as missing regardless of the payload.
If no attribute exists, it can be assumed that no values are missing.
See the [HDF5 policy draft (0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/0.1.0) for more details.

**Otherwise:**
the handling of missing values is determined by `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.version`:
- **For `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.version = 2`:** 
  the `data` dataset may have a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value to use as a missing value placeholder.
  Any value equal to this placeholder should be treated as missing.
  The HDF5 datatype of the attribute should be exactly equal to that of the dataset.
  For numbers, the scalar value may be NaN with a non-default payload, which should be considered via byte-wise comparisons, e.g., with `memcmp`.
  If no attribute exists, it can be assumed that no values are missing.
- **For `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.version = 1`:** 
  Missing integers and booleans are represented by -2147483648.
  Missing numbers are represented by a quiet NaN with a payload of 1954.

## Dimension names

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
the main group may optionally have a `dimension-names` attribute, which should be a string dataset of length 2.
The first and second entries should contain names of the string datasets containing the row and column names, respectively.
Each dimension name dataset should lie in the same HDF5 file (so the names should be relative to the root of the file), 
can be of any string datatype, and should be of length equal to the corresponding dimension.
Either entry may also be an empty string in which case it can be assumed that no names were present for that dimension.

**Otherwise:**
The `~hdf5_sparse_matrix.dimnames` property should be present and contain the name of a separate group containing the dimnames.
This group should contain zero or one string datasets for each dimension. 
The name of each string dataset is based on its dimension - `"0"` for rows, `"1"` for columns - and should have length equal to the extent of that dimension.
If no dataset is not present for a dimension, it can be assumed that no dimnames are available for that dimension.
