# HDF5 dense array

## Overview

A dense array stored inside a HDF5 file, corresponding to the [`hdf5_dense_array`](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/BiocObjectSchemas/raw/master/raw/hdf5_dense_array/v1.json) schema.

The file should contain a dataset at the name specified by `~hdf5_dense_array.dataset`.
The dimension extents of this dataset should be listed in reverse order to those in `~array.dimensions`,
i.e., the extent of the last HDF5 dimension should be equal to the extent of the first dimension in `~array.dimensions`.
This is because the dimensions reported in `~array.dimensions` are ordered from fastest-changing to slowest,
while the HDF5 library reports dataset dimensions from slowest-changing to fastest. 
In the context of matrices, this implies storage in a column-major layout where the first (faster) dimension corresponds to the rows and the second (slower) dimension corresponds to the columns.

This group may have a `version` property containing a scalar `<major>.<minor>` version string.
If a version attibute is present on `group`, all version-related properties in the schema (e.g., `~hdf5_dense_array.version`) will be ignored in the remainder of this document.

## Datatypes

The type of the array is specified by `~array.type` and can be integer, boolean, numeric, or string:

- String arrays can be represented by any string HDF5 dataset.
  The choice of datatype is left to the discretion of the data generator.
- Number arrays should be represented by any integer or floating-point HDF5 dataset.
  - **If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
    the HDF5 datatype may be any integer or float that is a subset of a 64-bit float.
    See the [HDF5 policy draft (0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/0.1.0) for more details.
- Integer arrays should be represented by an integer HDF5 dataset.
  - **If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
    the data type should be a subset of a 32-bit signed integer.
- Boolean arrays are stored as integer HDF5 datasets, where a value of 1 is truthy and a value of zero is falsey.
  - **If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
    the data type should be a subset of a 32-bit signed integer.

## Missing values

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
the dataset may have a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value to use as a missing value placeholder.
Any value equal to this placeholder should be treated as missing.
For non-string types, the HDF5 datatype of the attribute should be exactly equal to that of the dataset.
For string types, the datatype only needs to be same string type, and comparisons should be performed by byte-wise comparisons (e.g., with `strcmp`).
For numbers, the scalar value may be NaN, in which case all NaNs in the dataset are treated as missing regardless of the payload.
If no attribute exists, it can be assumed that no values are missing.
See the [HDF5 policy draft (0.1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/Bioc-HDF5-policy/tree/0.1.0) for more details.

**Otherwise:**
the handling of missing values is determined by `~hdf5_dense_array.version`:
- **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version = 2`:** 
  the dataset may have a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value to use as a missing value placeholder.
  Any value equal to this placeholder should be treated as missing.
  For non-string types, the HDF5 datatype of the attribute should be exactly equal to that of the dataset.
  For string types, the datatype only needs to be same string type, and comparisons should be performed by byte-wise comparisons (e.g., with `strcmp`).
  For numbers, the scalar value may be NaN with a non-default payload, which should be considered via byte-wise comparisons, e.g., with `memcmp`.
  If no attribute exists, it can be assumed that no values are missing.
- **For `~hdf5_dense_array.version = 1`:** 
  no placeholder is present for non-string types.
  Missing integers and booleans are represented by -2147483648 instead.
  Missing numbers are represented by a quiet NaN with a payload of 1954.
  Missing strings are represented by a `missing-value-placeholder` attribute, containing a scalar value of some string type.

## Dimension names

**If a `version` attribute is present on the main group:** 
the main group may optionally have a `dimension-names` attribute, which should be a string dataset of length equal to the number of dataset dimensions.
Each entry holds the name of a string dataset that contains the names along its corresponding dimension, 
i.e., the first entry specifies the location of the names for the first HDF5 dimension.
Each dimension name dataset should lie in the same HDF5 file (so the names in `dimension-names` should be relative to the root of the file), 
can be of any string datatype, and should be of length equal to the corresponding dimension.
Each name in `dimension-names` may also be an empty string in which case it can be assumed that no names were present for that dimension.

**Otherwise:**
The file may also contain the dimnames of the array, stored in a separate HDF5 group.
If present, the name of the group should be listed in the `~hdf5_dense_array.dimnames` property.
This group should contain zero or one string datasets for each dimension. 
The name of each string dataset is based on its dimension (e.g., `"0"` for rows, `"1"` for columns) and should have length equal to the extent of that dimension,
For historical reasons, the dimension name datasets correspond to dimensions in `~array.dimensions`, _not_ dimensions of the HDF5 dataset at `~hdf5_dense_array.dataset`),
i.e., the dataset named `"0"` should have length equal to the first entry of `~array.dimensions` (and thus the extent of the last dimension of the HDF5 dataset).
If no dataset is not present for a dimension, it can be assumed that no dimnames are available for that dimension.
