# Genomic ranges

## Overview

A `GenomicRanges` object stored inside a CSV file, formatted as described in the [**comservatory** specification (version 1.0)](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/comservatory).
This corresponds to the [`genomic_ranges`](https://github.com/ArtifactDB/BiocObjectSchemas/raw/master/raw/genomic_ranges/v1.json) schema.
We use `~` below to denote properties of the schema.

In the CSV, we expect columns in the following type and order:

- (optional) a column of strings containing names for each genomic range.
  All strings should be non-missing.
  Any column name may be used as long as it does not conflict with subsequent column names.
  This column should only be present if `~genomic_ranges.names = true`.
- A column named `seqnames`, containing strings with the reference sequence (e.g., chromosome) name for each genomic range.
  All strings should be non-missing and belong to the set of known sequences in the corresponding `sequence_information` object (referenced by `~genomic_ranges.sequence_information`).
- A column named `start`, containing the 1-based start position of each range on its reference sequence.
  All values are represented by 32-bit signed integers; negative values are allowed.
  No values should be missing.
- A column named `end`, containing the 1-based end position (inclusive) of each range.
  All values are represented by 32-bit signed integers; negative values are allowed.
  No values should be missing.
  The `end` value for each range should be greater than or equal to `start - 1`.
- A column named `strand`, containing the strand of each range.
  This should be one of the following strings: `+`, `-` or `*`.
  No values should be missing.

The number of rows should be equal to `~genomic_ranges.length`.
